Readme.md, before:

# erserve - An Erlang/Rserve communication application

## Introduction

### Rserve

[Rserve](http://www.rforge.net/Rserve/) is a TCP/IP server running in
[R](http://www.r-project.org/), allowing interfacing to R from many
languages without explicitly initialising R or linking with it.

### erserve

erserve is an Erlang application that implements the communication
with Rserve, making it possible to make calls to R from Erlang, and to
receive data back.

The interface is very simple, and the functionality implemented is at
this point limited, but includes the most common and useful data
types.


## Quickstart

1. Download and install [R](http://www.r-project.org/).

2. Install [Rserve](http://www.rforge.net/Rserve/), which can be
   easily done using R's package system:
```R
install.packages('Rserve')
```

3. Start the Rserve server in R:
```R
library(Rserve)
Rserve()
```

4. Open a terminal and clone the erserve git library:
```
git clone https://github.com/del/erserve.git
```

5. Compile erserve:
```
cd erserve
./rebar compile
```

6. Start an erlang node with erserve in its path:
```
erl -pa ebin/
```

7. Start the erserve application and connect to your Rserve
```erlang
application:start(erserve).
Conn = erserve:open("localhost", 6311).
```

8. Send a message to R to verify the connection works:
```erlang
{ok, Rdata} = erserve:eval(Conn, "c(1, 2, 3)"),
erserve:type(Rdata),  % xt_array_double
erserve:parse(Rdata). % [1.0,2.0,3.0]
```


## Connections

An erserve connection is opened using one of functions `open/0`, `open/1` or `open/2`, where the
arguments, if given, are hostname and port:
```erlang
Conn1 = open(),                 %% open("localhost", 6311)
Conn2 = open("somehost"),       %% open("somehost",  6311)
Conn3 = open("somehost", 1163).
```
To close a connection, simply send it to `close/1`:
```erlang
ok = close(Conn).
```

If you are in need of connection pooling, take a look at
[erserve_pool](http://github.com/del/erserve_pool).


## Issuing R commands

erserve supports two ways of running R commands: `eval_void/2` and `eval/2`.
The difference is that `eval_void/2` only receives an `ok` or `{error, ErrorCode, Reason}` as reply,
whereas `eval/2` returns `{ok, Rdata}` or `{error, ErrorCode, Reason}`.

`eval_void(Conn, Expr)` is used when you're issuing a command for the reason of side effects:
```erlang
ok = erserve:eval_void(Conn, "some.var <- 42").
```
whereas `eval(Conn, Expr)` is used when you wish to receive a reply from R. The return is in an
internal format which **should not** be matched on, since it is subject to change. To use the
returned data, make use of the `type/1` and `parse/1` functions:
```erlang
{ok, Rdata} = erserve:eval(Conn, "some.var"),
[42.0]      = case erserve:type(Rdata) of
                xt_array_double -> erserve:parse(Rdata);
                _OtherType      -> error
              end.
```


## Sending/receiving data

It's possible to upload a variable to R directly in binary format, to avoid having to create
expression strings for everything. To do this, use `set_variable/4`, which has the signature
`set_variable(Conn, Name, Type, Value)`.
```erlang
ok                     = erserve:set_variable(Conn, "some.var", xt_array_str, ["bla", "bla"]),
{ok, Rdata}            = erserve:eval(Conn, "some.var"),
xt_array_str           = erserve:type(Rdata),
[<<"bla">>, <<"bla">>] = erserve:parse(Rdata).
```

Note that erserve outputs all strings in binary format.

At the moment, uploading of variables supports the simple R types `xt_str`, `xt_array_double`,
`xt_array_int` and `xt_array_str`. On top of this, it also supports the more advanced formats
`xt_vector` and `dataframe`.

An `xt_vector` consists of a list of tuples `{Type, Value}` where `Type` is one of the just
mentioned types.

A dataframe is a list of tuples `{Name, Type, Value}`. Each such tuple generates a column in the
resulting dataframe, where `Name` is a string that becomes the column's name, and `Type` and
`Value` are as described before.

Some examples of variable uploading:
```erlang
ok = erserve:set_variable(Conn, "some.var", xt_str,          "hello world"),
ok = erserve:set_variable(Conn, "some.var", xt_array_double, [1.1, 2.2, 3.3]),
ok = erserve:set_variable(Conn, "some.var", xt_array_int,    [1, 2, 3]),
ok = erserve:set_variable(Conn, "some.var", xt_array_str,    ["hello", "world"]),
ok = erserve:set_variable(Conn, "some.var", xt_vector,       [ {xt_array_str, ["a", "b"]}
                                                             , {xt_array_int, [1, 3, 5]} ]),
ok = erserve:set_variable(Conn, "some.var", dataframe,       [ {"Letters", xt_array_str, ["a", "b"]}
                                                             , {"Numbers", xt_array_int, [1, 3]} ]).
```


## Acknowledgements

Thanks to my employer, [Klarna](http://klarna.com/) for allowing me to contribute to open source
as part of my work.

Commit message:

Added a little implementation detail section to Readme.md

Readme.md, after:

# erserve - An Erlang/Rserve communication application

## Introduction

### Rserve

[Rserve](http://www.rforge.net/Rserve/) is a TCP/IP server running in
[R](http://www.r-project.org/), allowing interfacing to R from many
languages without explicitly initialising R or linking with it.

### erserve

erserve is an Erlang application that implements the communication
with Rserve, making it possible to make calls to R from Erlang, and to
receive data back.

The interface is very simple, and the functionality implemented is at
this point limited, but includes the most common and useful data
types.


## Quickstart

1. Download and install [R](http://www.r-project.org/).

2. Install [Rserve](http://www.rforge.net/Rserve/), which can be
   easily done using R's package system:
```R
install.packages('Rserve')
```

3. Start the Rserve server in R:
```R
library(Rserve)
Rserve()
```

4. Open a terminal and clone the erserve git library:
```
git clone https://github.com/del/erserve.git
```

5. Compile erserve:
```
cd erserve
./rebar compile
```

6. Start an erlang node with erserve in its path:
```
erl -pa ebin/
```

7. Start the erserve application and connect to your Rserve
```erlang
application:start(erserve).
Conn = erserve:open("localhost", 6311).
```

8. Send a message to R to verify the connection works:
```erlang
{ok, Rdata} = erserve:eval(Conn, "c(1, 2, 3)"),
erserve:type(Rdata),  % xt_array_double
erserve:parse(Rdata). % [1.0,2.0,3.0]
```


## Connections

An erserve connection is opened using one of functions `open/0`, `open/1` or `open/2`, where the
arguments, if given, are hostname and port:
```erlang
Conn1 = open(),                 %% open("localhost", 6311)
Conn2 = open("somehost"),       %% open("somehost",  6311)
Conn3 = open("somehost", 1163).
```
To close a connection, simply send it to `close/1`:
```erlang
ok = close(Conn).
```

If you are in need of connection pooling, take a look at
[erserve_pool](http://github.com/del/erserve_pool).


## Issuing R commands

erserve supports two ways of running R commands: `eval_void/2` and `eval/2`.
The difference is that `eval_void/2` only receives an `ok` or `{error, ErrorCode, Reason}` as reply,
whereas `eval/2` returns `{ok, Rdata}` or `{error, ErrorCode, Reason}`.

`eval_void(Conn, Expr)` is used when you're issuing a command for the reason of side effects:
```erlang
ok = erserve:eval_void(Conn, "some.var <- 42").
```
whereas `eval(Conn, Expr)` is used when you wish to receive a reply from R. The return is in an
internal format which **should not** be matched on, since it is subject to change. To use the
returned data, make use of the `type/1` and `parse/1` functions:
```erlang
{ok, Rdata} = erserve:eval(Conn, "some.var"),
[42.0]      = case erserve:type(Rdata) of
                xt_array_double -> erserve:parse(Rdata);
                _OtherType      -> error
              end.
```


## Sending/receiving data

It's possible to upload a variable to R directly in binary format, to avoid having to create
expression strings for everything. To do this, use `set_variable/4`, which has the signature
`set_variable(Conn, Name, Type, Value)`.
```erlang
ok                     = erserve:set_variable(Conn, "some.var", xt_array_str, ["bla", "bla"]),
{ok, Rdata}            = erserve:eval(Conn, "some.var"),
xt_array_str           = erserve:type(Rdata),
[<<"bla">>, <<"bla">>] = erserve:parse(Rdata).
```

Note that erserve outputs all strings in binary format.

At the moment, uploading of variables supports the simple R types `xt_str`, `xt_array_double`,
`xt_array_int` and `xt_array_str`. On top of this, it also supports the more advanced formats
`xt_vector` and `dataframe`.

An `xt_vector` consists of a list of tuples `{Type, Value}` where `Type` is one of the just
mentioned types.

A dataframe is a list of tuples `{Name, Type, Value}`. Each such tuple generates a column in the
resulting dataframe, where `Name` is a string that becomes the column's name, and `Type` and
`Value` are as described before.

Some examples of variable uploading:
```erlang
ok = erserve:set_variable(Conn, "some.var", xt_str,          "hello world"),
ok = erserve:set_variable(Conn, "some.var", xt_array_double, [1.1, 2.2, 3.3]),
ok = erserve:set_variable(Conn, "some.var", xt_array_int,    [1, 2, 3]),
ok = erserve:set_variable(Conn, "some.var", xt_array_str,    ["hello", "world"]),
ok = erserve:set_variable(Conn, "some.var", xt_vector,       [ {xt_array_str, ["a", "b"]}
                                                             , {xt_array_int, [1, 3, 5]} ]),
ok = erserve:set_variable(Conn, "some.var", dataframe,       [ {"Letters", xt_array_str, ["a", "b"]}
                                                             , {"Numbers", xt_array_int, [1, 3]} ]).
```


## Implementation details of interest

The communication with Rserve is done using gen_tcp, and messages are read from Rserve into
memory. This means that some caution is needed to avoid calling R code that will return very large
data sets.

String arrays are returned as arrays of binary strings. However, there is conversion over lists
internally, so the individual strings do not reference the original binary containing the whole
string array.


## Acknowledgements

Thanks to my employer, [Klarna](http://klarna.com/) for allowing me to contribute to open source
as part of my work.
